PHIL_105G_Notes.md, before:

# PHIL 105G Notes

## Obstacles to critical thinking

**Confirmation bias** is a tendency that people prefer information that confirms their existing opinions.

A **reasoning heuristic** is a mental shortcut we use to simplify decision making.

The **availability heuristic** is the judging the probability of an event by how easily examples come to mind.

The **framing effect** is where changes in how a question is posed results in changes in the chosen answer.

## Arguments

A **statement** is a sentence that is either true or false.

An **argument** is a group of statements including premises and a conclusion.  
A **premises** is a statement used to justify the conclusion.  
The **conclusion** is the outcome of the argument.  

A **deductive** argument is one for which the premises are offered to provide logically conclusive support for its conclusion.  
A **non-deductive** argument is an argument for which the premises are offered to provide probable, but not conclusive support for its conclusions.

A **valid** argument is a deductive argument that succeeds in providing decisive logical support.  
An **invalid** argument is a deductive argument that fails in providing conclusive logical support.

A **strong** argument is a non-deductive argument that succeeds in providing probable, but not conclusive, logical support for its conclusion.  
A **weak** argument is a non-deductive argument that fails to provide probable support for its conclusion.

A **counter-example** to an argument is a situation that shows that the argument can have true premises and a false conclusion.

An argument is valid / strong if and only if there are no counter-examples to the argument.

A **sound** argument is a deductive argument that has true premises.  
A **cogent** argument is a strong non-deductive argument that has true premises.

A **good** argument is one which is sound or cogent.  
A **bad** argument is one which is invalid, weak or has false premises.


![alt text](good-bad-diagram.png "Good and bad arguments")

## Virtues

The **principle of charity** is to always try to understand the strongest, most persuasive version of an argument.

The **instrumental justification** proposes that critical thinking is valuable because using it means we get closer to the truth.

The **intrinsic justification** proposes that critical thinking is valuable in its own right because it is what makes us better people.

## Fallacies
### Fallacies of relevance
**Fallacies of relevance** offer reasons to believe a claim or conclusion that, on examination, turn out to not in fact to be reasons to do any such thing.

* The **Tu Quoque fallacy** is the rejection of an argument because the person advancing it fails to practice what they preach.

* The **red herring fallacy** is when an arguer side-tracks the audience with an irrelevant issue.

* The **straw-man fallacy** is when an arguer distorts and attacks a weaker version of their opponent’s argument.

* The **ad hominem fallacy** is when an arguer attacks the person rather than evaluating the argument on its merits.  

* An **appeal to authority** is the relying on the view of apparent authorities to settle the truth of a statement or argument.

### Fallacies of unacceptable premises
**Fallacies of unacceptable premises** attempt to introduce premises that, while they may be relevant, don’t support the conclusion of the argument.

* The **false dilemma fallacy** is when an arguer presents only two options and restricts the possibility of more options.

### Formal fallacies

**Formal fallacies** are false because of their form or structure.

* The **affirming the consequent fallacy** is the inferring the converse from the original statement. The converse of $P\rightarrow Q$ is $Q\rightarrow P$.
* The **denying the antecedent fallacy** is the inferring the inverse from the original statement. The inverse of $P\rightarrow Q$ is $\lnot P\rightarrow \lnot Q$.

## Scientific method
1. Identify a problem or pose a question.
2. Devise hypothesises to explain the event or phenomenon.
3. Derive a test for the hypothesis.
4. Perform the test.
5. Accept or reject the hypothesis.

Tests can lead us to reject a hypothesis, but not to conclude that it's true.

A **scientific hypothesis** is an explanation based on observable evidence requires that it can be testable and falsifiable.

**Inference to the best explanation** is a non-deductive argument which selects the best hypothesis that explains the observations.

## Numeracy
The **base rate** fallacy

Commit message:

Added more notes on Science.

PHIL_105G_Notes.md, after:

# PHIL 105G Notes

## Obstacles to critical thinking

**Confirmation bias** is a tendency that people prefer information that confirms their existing opinions.

A **reasoning heuristic** is a mental shortcut we use to simplify decision making.

The **availability heuristic** is the judging the probability of an event by how easily examples come to mind.

The **framing effect** is where changes in how a question is posed results in changes in the chosen answer.

## Arguments

A **statement** is a sentence that is either true or false.

An **argument** is a group of statements including premises and a conclusion.  
A **premises** is a statement used to justify the conclusion.  
The **conclusion** is the outcome of the argument.  

A **deductive** argument is one for which the premises are offered to provide logically conclusive support for its conclusion.  
A **non-deductive** argument is an argument for which the premises are offered to provide probable, but not conclusive support for its conclusions.

A **valid** argument is a deductive argument that succeeds in providing decisive logical support.  
An **invalid** argument is a deductive argument that fails in providing conclusive logical support.

A **strong** argument is a non-deductive argument that succeeds in providing probable, but not conclusive, logical support for its conclusion.  
A **weak** argument is a non-deductive argument that fails to provide probable support for its conclusion.

A **counter-example** to an argument is a situation that shows that the argument can have true premises and a false conclusion.

An argument is valid / strong if and only if there are no counter-examples to the argument.

A **sound** argument is a deductive argument that has true premises.  
A **cogent** argument is a strong non-deductive argument that has true premises.

A **good** argument is one which is sound or cogent.  
A **bad** argument is one which is invalid, weak or has false premises.


![alt text](good-bad-diagram.png "Good and bad arguments")

## Virtues

The **principle of charity** is to always try to understand the strongest, most persuasive version of an argument.

The **instrumental justification** proposes that critical thinking is valuable because using it means we get closer to the truth.

The **intrinsic justification** proposes that critical thinking is valuable in its own right because it is what makes us better people.

## Fallacies
### Fallacies of relevance
**Fallacies of relevance** offer reasons to believe a claim or conclusion that, on examination, turn out to not in fact to be reasons to do any such thing.

* The **Tu Quoque fallacy** is the rejection of an argument because the person advancing it fails to practice what they preach.

* The **red herring fallacy** is when an arguer side-tracks the audience with an irrelevant issue.

* The **straw-man fallacy** is when an arguer distorts and attacks a weaker version of their opponent’s argument.

* The **ad hominem fallacy** is when an arguer attacks the person rather than evaluating the argument on its merits.  

* An **appeal to authority** is the relying on the view of apparent authorities to settle the truth of a statement or argument.

### Fallacies of unacceptable premises
**Fallacies of unacceptable premises** attempt to introduce premises that, while they may be relevant, don’t support the conclusion of the argument.

* The **false dilemma fallacy** is when an arguer presents only two options and restricts the possibility of more options.

### Formal fallacies

**Formal fallacies** are false because of their form or structure.

* The **affirming the consequent fallacy** is the inferring the converse from the original statement. The converse of $P\rightarrow Q$ is $Q\rightarrow P$.
* The **denying the antecedent fallacy** is the inferring the inverse from the original statement. The inverse of $P\rightarrow Q$ is $\lnot P\rightarrow \lnot Q$.

## Science

An **explanation** is a collection of statements asserting why or how something is the case.

### Scientific method
1. Identify a problem or pose a question.
2. Devise hypothesises to explain the event or phenomenon.
3. Derive a test for the hypothesis.
4. Perform the test.
5. Accept or reject the hypothesis.

Tests can lead us to reject a hypothesis, but not to conclude that it's true.

A **scientific hypothesis** is an explanation based on observable evidence requires that it can be testable and falsifiable.

The **falsification** of a hypothesis is the action of denying its plausibility.

An **inference to the best explanation** is a strong non-deductive argument which selects the best hypothesis that explains the observations.

A **random controlled trial** is an experiment that is used to compare the intervention to the one group than the control group.

A **double-blind** study is one where both the participants and testers do not know who is in which group.



## Numeracy
The **base rate** fallacy
